<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIX: The Subtlety of the Devil</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Subtlety of the Devil</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>There was a sudden determination and alertness in Bryce‚Äôs last words which contrasted strongly, and even strangely, with the almost cynical indifference that had characterized him since his visitors came in, and the two men recognized it and glanced questioningly at each other. There was an alteration, too, in his manner; instead of lounging lazily in his chair, as if he had no other thought than of personal ease, he was now sitting erect, looking sharply from one man to the other; his whole attitude, bearing, speech seemed to indicate that he had suddenly made up his mind to adopt some definite course of action.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôll tell you more!‚Äù he repeated. ‚ÄúAnd, since you‚Äôre here‚ÅÝ‚Äînow!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mitchington, who felt a curious uneasiness, gave Jettison another glance. And this time it was Jettison who spoke.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI should say,‚Äù he remarked quietly, ‚Äúknowing what I‚Äôve gathered of the matter, that we ought to be glad of any information <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝBryce can give us.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, to be sure!‚Äù assented Mitchington. ‚ÄúYou know more, then, doctor?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bryce motioned his visitors to draw their chairs nearer to his, and when he spoke it was in the low, concentrated tones of a man who means business‚ÅÝ‚Äîand confidential business.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow look here, Mitchington,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúand you, too, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝJettison, as you‚Äôre on this job‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôm going to talk straight to both of you. And to begin with, I‚Äôll make a bold assertion‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI know more of this Wrychester Paradise mystery‚ÅÝ‚Äîinvolving the deaths of both Braden and Collishaw, than any man living‚ÅÝ‚Äîbecause, though you don‚Äôt know it, Mitchington, I‚Äôve gone right into it. And I‚Äôll tell you in confidence why I went into it‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI want to marry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford‚Äôs ward, Miss Bewery!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bryce accompanied this candid admission with a look which seemed to say: Here we are, three men of the world, who know what things are‚ÅÝ‚Äîwe understand each other! And while Jettison merely nodded comprehendingly, Mitchington put his thoughts into words.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTo be sure, doctor, to be sure!‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúAnd accordingly‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat‚Äôs their affair, is yours! Of course!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSomething like that,‚Äù assented Bryce. ‚ÄúNaturally no man wishes to marry unless he knows as much as he can get to know about the woman he wants, her family, her antecedents‚ÅÝ‚Äîand all that. Now, pretty nearly everybody in Wrychester who knows them, knows that there‚Äôs a mystery about <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford and his two wards‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs been talked of, no end, amongst the old dowagers and gossips of the Close, particularly‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou know what they are! Miss Bewery herself, and her brother, young Dick, in a lesser degree, know there‚Äôs a mystery. And if there‚Äôs one man in the world who knows the secret, it‚Äôs Ransford. And, up to now, Ransford won‚Äôt tell‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe won‚Äôt even tell Miss Bewery. I know that she‚Äôs asked him‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe keeps up an obstinate silence. And so‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI determined to find things out for myself.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAye‚ÅÝ‚Äîand when did you start on that little game, now, doctor?‚Äù asked Mitchington. ‚ÄúWas it before, or since, this affair developed?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIn a really serious way‚ÅÝ‚Äîsince,‚Äù replied Bryce. ‚ÄúWhat happened on the day of Braden‚Äôs death made me go thoroughly into the whole matter. Now, what did happen? I‚Äôll tell you frankly, now, Mitchington, that when we talked once before about this affair, I didn‚Äôt tell you all I might have told. I‚Äôd my reasons for reticence. But now I‚Äôll give you full particulars of what happened that morning within my knowledge‚ÅÝ‚Äîpay attention, both of you, and you‚Äôll see how one thing fits into another. That morning, about half-past nine, Ransford left his surgery and went across the Close. Not long after he‚Äôd gone, this man Braden came to the door, and asked me if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford was in? I said he wasn‚Äôt‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe‚Äôd just gone out, and I showed the man in which direction. He said he‚Äôd once known a <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford, and went away. A little later, I followed. Near the entrance of Paradise, I saw Ransford leaving the west porch of the Cathedral. He was undeniably in a state of agitation‚ÅÝ‚Äîpale, nervous. He didn‚Äôt see me. I went on and met Varner, who told me of the accident. I went with him to the foot of <abbr>St.</abbr>¬ÝWrytha‚Äôs Stair and found the man who had recently called at the surgery. He died just as I reached him. I sent for you. When you came, I went back to the surgery‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI found Ransford there in a state of most unusual agitation‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe looked like a man who has had a terrible shock. So much for these events. Put them together.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bryce paused awhile, as if marshalling his facts.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow, after that,‚Äù he continued presently, ‚ÄúI began to investigate matters myself‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor my own satisfaction. And very soon I found out certain things‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhich I‚Äôll summarize, briefly, because some of my facts are doubtless known to you already. First of all‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe man who came here as John Braden was, in reality, one John Brake. He was at one time manager of a branch of a well-known London banking company. He appropriated money from them under apparently mysterious circumstances of which I, as yet, knew nothing; he was prosecuted, convicted, and sentenced to ten years‚Äô penal servitude. And those two wards of Ransford‚Äôs, Mary and Richard Bewery, as they are called, are, in reality, Mary and Richard Brake‚ÅÝ‚Äîhis children.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôve established that as a fact?‚Äù asked Jettison, who was listening with close attention. ‚ÄúIt‚Äôs not a surmise on your part?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bryce hesitated before replying to this question. After all, he reflected, it was a surmise. He could not positively prove his assertion.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell,‚Äù he answered after a moment‚Äôs thought, ‚ÄúI‚Äôll qualify that by saying that from the evidence I have, and from what I know, I believe it to be an indisputable fact. What I do know of fact, hard, positive fact, is this:‚ÅÝ‚ÄîJohn Brake married a Mary Bewery at the parish church of Braden Medworth, near Barthorpe, in Leicestershire: I‚Äôve seen the entry in the register with my own eyes. His best man, who signed the register as a witness, was Mark Ransford. Brake and Ransford, as young men, had been in the habit of going to Braden Medworth to fish; Mary Bewery was governess at the vicarage there. It was always supposed she would marry Ransford; instead, she married Brake, who, of course, took her off to London. Of their married life, I know nothing. But within a few years, Brake was in trouble, for the reason I have told you. He was arrested‚ÅÝ‚Äîand Harker was the man who arrested him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDear me!‚Äù exclaimed Mitchington. ‚ÄúNow, if I‚Äôd only known‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôll know a lot before I‚Äôm through,‚Äù said Bryce. ‚ÄúNow, Harker, of course, can tell a lot‚ÅÝ‚Äîyet it‚Äôs unsatisfying. Brake could make no defence‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut his counsel threw out strange hints and suggestions‚ÅÝ‚Äîall to the effect that Brake had been cruelly and wickedly deceived‚ÅÝ‚Äîin fact, as it were, trapped into doing what he did. And‚ÅÝ‚Äîby a man whom he‚Äôd trusted as a close friend. So much came to Harker‚Äôs ears‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut no more, and on that particular point I‚Äôve no light. Go on from that to Brake‚Äôs private affairs. At the time of his arrest he had a wife and two very young children. Either just before, or at, or immediately after his arrest they completely disappeared‚ÅÝ‚Äîand Brake himself utterly refused to say one single word about them. Harker asked if he could do anything‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBrake‚Äôs answer was that no one was to concern himself. He preserved an obstinate silence on that point. The clergyman in whose family <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝBrake had been governess saw Brake, after his conviction‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBrake would say nothing to him. Of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝBrake, nothing more is known‚ÅÝ‚Äîto me at any rate. What was known at the time is this‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBrake communicated to all who came in contact with him, just then, the idea of a man who has been cruelly wronged and deceived, who takes refuge in sullen silence, and who is already planning and cherishing‚ÅÝ‚Äîrevenge!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAye, aye!‚Äù muttered Mitchington. ‚ÄúRevenge?‚ÅÝ‚Äîjust so!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBrake, then,‚Äù continued Bryce, ‚Äúgoes off to his term of penal servitude, and so disappears‚ÅÝ‚Äîuntil he reappears here in Wrychester. Leave him for a moment, and go back. And‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs a going back, no doubt, to supposition and to theory‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut there‚Äôs reason in what I shall advance. We know‚ÅÝ‚Äîbeyond doubt‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat Brake had been tricked and deceived, in some money matter, by some man‚ÅÝ‚Äîsome mysterious man‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhom he referred to as having been his closest friend. We know, too, that there was extraordinary mystery in the disappearance of his wife and children. Now, from all that has been found out, who was Brake‚Äôs closest friend? Ransford! And of Ransford, at that time, there‚Äôs no trace. He, too, disappeared‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs a fact which I‚Äôve established. Years later, he reappears‚ÅÝ‚Äîhere at Wrychester, where he‚Äôs bought a practice. Eventually he has two young people, who are represented as his wards, come to live with him. Their name is Bewery. The name of the young woman whom John Brake married was Bewery. What‚Äôs the inference? That their mother‚Äôs dead‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat they‚Äôre known under her maiden name: that they, without a shadow of doubt, are John Brake‚Äôs children. And that leads up to my theory‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhich I‚Äôll now tell you in confidence‚ÅÝ‚Äîif you wish for it.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs what I particularly wish for,‚Äù observed Jettison quietly. ‚ÄúThe very thing!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen, it‚Äôs this,‚Äù said Bryce. ‚ÄúRansford was the close friend who tricked and deceived Brake. He probably tricked him in some money affair, and deceived him in his domestic affairs. I take it that Ransford ran away with Brake‚Äôs wife, and that Brake, sooner than air all his grievance to the world, took it silently and began to concoct his ideas of revenge. I put the whole thing this way. Ransford ran away with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝBrake and the two children‚ÅÝ‚Äîmere infants‚ÅÝ‚Äîand disappeared. Brake, when he came out of prison, went abroad‚ÅÝ‚Äîpossibly with the idea of tracking them. Meanwhile, as is quite evident, he engaged in business and did well. He came back to England as John Braden, and, for the reason of which you‚Äôre aware, he paid a visit to Wrychester, utterly unaware that anyone known to him lived here. Now, try to reconstruct what happened. He looks round the Close that morning. He sees the name of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝMark Ransford on the brass plate of a surgery door. He goes to the surgery, asks a question, makes a remark, goes away. What is the probable sequence of events? He meets Ransford near the Cathedral‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhere Ransford certainly was. They recognize each other‚ÅÝ‚Äîmost likely they turn aside, go up to that gallery as a quiet place, to talk‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere is an altercation‚ÅÝ‚Äîblows‚ÅÝ‚Äîsomehow or other, probably from accident, Braden is thrown through that open doorway, to his death. And‚ÅÝ‚ÄîCollishaw saw what happened!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bryce was watching his listeners, turning alternately from one to the other. But it needed little attention on his part to see that theirs was already closely strained; each man was eagerly taking in all that he said and suggested. And he went on emphasizing every point as he made it.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúCollishaw saw what happened?‚Äù he repeated. ‚ÄúThat, of course, is theory‚ÅÝ‚Äîsupposition. But now we pass from theory back to actual fact. I‚Äôll tell you something now, Mitchington, which you‚Äôve never heard of, I‚Äôm certain. I made it in my way, after Collishaw‚Äôs death, to get some information, secretly, from his widow, who‚Äôs a fairly shrewd, intelligent woman for her class. Now, the widow, in looking over her husband‚Äôs effects, in a certain drawer in which he kept various personal matters, came across the deposit book of a Friendly Society of which Collishaw had been a member for some years. It appears that he, Collishaw, was something of a saving man, and every year he managed to put by a bit of money out of his wages, and twice or thrice in the year he took these savings‚ÅÝ‚Äînever very much; merely a pound or two‚ÅÝ‚Äîto this Friendly Society, which, it seems, takes deposits in that way from its members. Now, in this book is an entry‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI saw it‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhich shows that only two days before his death, Collishaw paid fifty pounds‚ÅÝ‚Äîfifty pounds, mark you!‚ÅÝ‚Äîinto the Friendly Society. Where should Collishaw get fifty pounds, all of a sudden? He was a mason‚Äôs labourer, earning at the very outside twenty-six or eight shillings a week. According to his wife, there was no one to leave him a legacy. She never heard of his receipt of this money from any source. But‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere‚Äôs the fact! What explains it? My theory‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat the rumour that Collishaw, with a pint too much ale in him, had hinted that he could say something about Braden‚Äôs death if he chose, had reached Braden‚Äôs assailant; that he had made it his business to see Collishaw and had paid him that fifty pounds as hush-money‚ÅÝ‚Äîand, later, had decided to rid himself of Collishaw altogether, as he undoubtedly did, by poison.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Once more Bryce paused‚ÅÝ‚Äîand once more the two listeners showed their attention by complete silence.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNow we come to the question‚ÅÝ‚Äîhow was Collishaw poisoned?‚Äù continued Bryce. ‚ÄúFor poisoned he was, without doubt. Here we go back to theory and supposition once more. I haven‚Äôt the least doubt that the hydrocyanic acid which caused his death was taken by him in a pill‚ÅÝ‚Äîa pill that was in that box which they found on him, Mitchington, and showed me. But that particular pill, though precisely similar in appearance, could not be made up of the same ingredients which were in the other pills. It was probably a thickly coated pill which contained the poison;‚ÅÝ‚Äîin solution of course. The coating would melt almost as soon as the man had swallowed it‚ÅÝ‚Äîand death would result instantaneously. Collishaw, you may say, was condemned to death when he put that box of pills in his waistcoat pocket. It was mere chance, mere luck, as to when the exact moment of death came to him. There had been six pills in that box‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere were five left. So Collishaw picked out the poisoned pill‚ÅÝ‚Äîfirst! It might have been delayed till the sixth dose, you see‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut he was doomed.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mitchington showed a desire to speak, and Bryce paused.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat about what Ransford said before the Coroner?‚Äù asked Mitchington. ‚ÄúHe demanded certain information about the postmortem, you know, which, he said, ought to have shown that there was nothing poisonous in those pills.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPooh!‚Äù exclaimed Bryce contemptuously. ‚ÄúMere bluff! Of such a pill as that I‚Äôve described there‚Äôd be no trace but the sugar coating‚ÅÝ‚Äîand the poison. I tell you, I haven‚Äôt the least doubt that that was how the poison was administered. It was easy. And‚ÅÝ‚Äîwho is there that would know how easily it could be administered but‚ÅÝ‚Äîa medical man?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mitchington and Jettison exchanged glances. Then Jettison leaned nearer to Bryce.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSo your theory is that Ransford got rid of both Braden and Collishaw‚ÅÝ‚Äîmurdered both of them, in fact?‚Äù he suggested. ‚ÄúDo I understand that‚Äôs what it really comes to‚ÅÝ‚Äîin plain words?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNot quite,‚Äù replied Bryce. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt say that Ransford meant to kill Braden‚ÅÝ‚Äîmy notion is that they met, had an altercation, probably a struggle, and that Braden lost his life in it. But as regards Collishaw‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt forget!‚Äù interrupted Mitchington. ‚ÄúVarner swore that he saw Braden flung through that doorway! Flung out! He saw a hand.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúFor everything that Varner could prove to the contrary,‚Äù answered Bryce, ‚Äúthe hand might have been stretched out to pull Braden back. No‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI think there may have been accident in that affair. But, as regards Collishaw‚ÅÝ‚Äîmurder, without doubt‚ÅÝ‚Äîdeliberate!‚Äù</p>
			<p>He lighted another cigarette, with the air of a man who had spoken his mind, and Mitchington, realizing that he had said all he had to say, got up from his seat.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs all very interesting and very clever, doctor,‚Äù he said, glancing at Jettison. ‚ÄúAnd we shall keep it all in mind. Of course, you‚Äôve talked all this over with Harker? I should like to know what he has to say. Now that you‚Äôve told us who he is, I suppose we can talk to him?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôll have to wait a few days, then,‚Äù said Bryce. ‚ÄúHe‚Äôs gone to town‚ÅÝ‚Äîby the last train tonight‚ÅÝ‚Äîon this business. I‚Äôve sent him. I had some information today about Ransford‚Äôs whereabouts during the time of disappearance, and I‚Äôve commissioned Harker to examine into it. When I hear what he‚Äôs found out, I‚Äôll let you know.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôre taking some trouble,‚Äù remarked Mitchington.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôve told you the reason,‚Äù answered Bryce.</p>
			<p>Mitchington hesitated a little; then, with a motion of his head towards the door, beckoned Jettison to follow him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAll right,‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúThere‚Äôs plenty for us to see into, I‚Äôm thinking!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bryce laughed and pointed to a shelf of books near the fireplace.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you know what Napoleon Bonaparte once gave as sound advice to police?‚Äù he asked. ‚ÄúNo! Then I‚Äôll tell you. ‚ÄòThe art of the police,‚Äô he said, ‚Äòis not to see that which it is useless for it to see.‚Äô Good counsel, Mitchington!‚Äù</p>
			<p>The two men went away through the midnight streets, and kept silence until they were near the door of Jettison‚Äôs hotel. Then Mitchington spoke.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell!‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúWe‚Äôve had a couple of tales, anyhow! What do you think of things, now?‚Äù</p>
			<p>Jettison threw back his head with a dry laugh.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNever been better puzzled in all my time!‚Äù he said. ‚ÄúNever! But‚ÅÝ‚Äîif that young doctor‚Äôs playing a game‚ÅÝ‚Äîthen, by the Lord Harry, inspector, it‚Äôs a damned deep ‚Äôun! And my advice is‚ÅÝ‚Äîwatch the lot!‚Äù</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
