<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII: The Unexpected</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Unexpected</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Mary‚Äôs first instinct on seeing the approach of Pemberton Bryce, the one man she least desired to see, was to retreat to the back of the house and send the parlourmaid to the door to say her mistress was not at home. But she had lately become aware of Bryce‚Äôs curiously dogged persistence in following up whatever he had in view, and she reflected that if he were sent away then he would be sure to come back and come back until he had got whatever it was that he wanted. And after a moment‚Äôs further consideration, she walked out of the front door and confronted him resolutely in the garden.</p>
			<p>‚Äú<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford is away,‚Äù she said with almost unnecessary brusqueness. ‚ÄúHe‚Äôs away until evening.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt want him,‚Äù replied Bryce just as brusquely. ‚ÄúI came to see you.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mary hesitated. She continued to regard Bryce steadily, and Bryce did not like the way in which she was looking at him. He made haste to speak before she could either leave or dismiss him.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou‚Äôd better give me a few minutes,‚Äù he said, with a note of warning. ‚ÄúI‚Äôm here in your interests‚ÅÝ‚Äîor in Ransford‚Äôs. I may as well tell you, straight out, Ransford‚Äôs in serious and imminent danger! That‚Äôs a fact.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDanger of what?‚Äù she demanded.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúArrest‚ÅÝ‚Äîinstant arrest!‚Äù replied Bryce. ‚ÄúI‚Äôm telling you the truth. He‚Äôll probably be arrested tonight, on his return. There‚Äôs no imagination in all this‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI‚Äôm speaking of what I know. I‚Äôve‚ÅÝ‚Äîcuriously enough‚ÅÝ‚Äîgot mixed up with these affairs, through no seeking of my own, and I know what‚Äôs behind the scenes. If it were known that I‚Äôm letting out secrets to you, I should get into trouble. But, I want to warn you!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mary stood before him on the path, hesitating. She knew enough to know that Bryce was telling some sort of truth: it was plain that he had been mixed up in the recent mysteries, and there was a ring of conviction in his voice which impressed her. And suddenly she had visions of Ransford‚Äôs arrest, of his being dragged off to prison to meet a cruel accusation, of the shame and disgrace, and she hesitated further.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut if that‚Äôs so,‚Äù she said at last, ‚Äúwhat‚Äôs the good of coming to me? I can‚Äôt do anything!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI can!‚Äù said Bryce significantly. ‚ÄúI know more‚ÅÝ‚Äîmuch more‚ÅÝ‚Äîthan the police know‚ÅÝ‚Äîmore than anybody knows. I can save Ransford. Understand that!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat do you want now?‚Äù she asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTo talk to you‚ÅÝ‚Äîto tell you how things are,‚Äù answered Bryce. ‚ÄúWhat harm is there in that? To make you see how matters stand, and then to show you what I can do to put things right.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mary glanced at an open summerhouse which stood beneath the beech trees on one side of the garden. She moved towards it and sat down there, and Bryce followed her and seated himself.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù she said.</p>
			<p>Bryce realized that his moment had arrived. He paused, endeavouring to remember the careful preparations he had made for putting his case. Somehow, he was not so clear as to his line of attack as he had been ten minutes previously‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe realized that he had to deal with a young woman who was not likely to be taken in nor easily deceived. And suddenly he plunged into what he felt to be the thick of things.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhether you, or whether Ransford‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhether both or either of you, know it or not,‚Äù he said, ‚Äúthe police have been on to Ransford ever since that Collishaw affair! Underground work, you know. Mitchington has been digging into things ever since then, and lately he‚Äôs had a London detective helping him.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mary, who had carried her work into the garden, had now resumed it, and as Bryce began to talk she bent over it steadily stitching.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWell?‚Äù she said.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúLook here!‚Äù continued Bryce. ‚ÄúHas it never struck you‚ÅÝ‚Äîit must have done!‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat there‚Äôs considerable mystery about Ransford? But whether it has struck you or not, it‚Äôs there, and it‚Äôs struck the police forcibly. Mystery connected with him before‚ÅÝ‚Äîlong before‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe ever came here. And associated, in some way, with that man Braden. Not of late‚ÅÝ‚Äîin years past. And, naturally, the police have tried to find out what that was.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat have they found out?‚Äù asked Mary quietly.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat I‚Äôm not at liberty to tell,‚Äù replied Bryce. ‚ÄúBut I can tell you this‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey know, Mitchington and the London man, that there were passages between Ransford and Braden years ago.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúHow many years ago?‚Äù interrupted Mary.</p>
			<p>Bryce hesitated a moment. He had a suspicion that this self-possessed young woman who was taking everything more quietly than he had anticipated, might possibly know more than he gave her credit for knowing. He had been watching her fingers since they sat down in the summerhouse, and his sharp eyes saw that they were as steady as the spire of the cathedral above the trees‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe knew from that that she was neither frightened nor anxious.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOh, well‚ÅÝ‚Äîseventeen to twenty years ago,‚Äù he answered. ‚ÄúAbout that time. There were passages, I say, and they were of a nature which suggests that the reappearance of Braden on Ransford‚Äôs present stage of life would be, extremely unpleasant and unwelcome to Ransford.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúVague!‚Äù murmured Mary. ‚ÄúExtremely vague!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúBut quite enough,‚Äù retorted Bryce, ‚Äúto give the police the suggestion of motive. I tell you the police know quite enough to know that Braden was, of all men in the world, the last man Ransford desired to see cross his path again. And‚ÅÝ‚Äîon that morning on which the Paradise affair occurred‚ÅÝ‚ÄîBraden did cross his path. Therefore, in the conventional police way of thinking and looking at things, there‚Äôs motive.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMotive for what?‚Äù asked Mary.</p>
			<p>Bryce arrived here at one of his critical stages, and he paused a moment in order to choose his words.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDon‚Äôt get any false ideas or impressions,‚Äù he said at last. ‚ÄúI‚Äôm not accusing Ransford of anything. I‚Äôm only telling you what I know the police think and are on the very edge of accusing him of. To put it plainly‚ÅÝ‚Äîof murder. They say he‚Äôd a motive for murdering Braden‚ÅÝ‚Äîand with them motive is everything. It‚Äôs the first thing they seem to think of; they first question they ask themselves. ‚ÄòWhy should this man have murdered that man?‚Äô‚ÅÝ‚Äîdo you see! ‚ÄòWhat motive had he?‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs the point. And they think‚ÅÝ‚Äîthese chaps like Mitchington and the London man‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat Ransford certainly had a motive for getting rid of Braden when they met.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúWhat was the motive?‚Äù asked Mary.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThey‚Äôve found out something‚ÅÝ‚Äîperhaps a good deal‚ÅÝ‚Äîabout what happened between Braden and Ransford some years ago,‚Äù replied Bryce. ‚ÄúAnd their theory is‚ÅÝ‚Äîif you want to know the truth‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat Ransford ran away with Braden‚Äôs wife, and that Braden had been looking for him ever since.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bryce had kept his eyes on Mary‚Äôs hands, and now at last he saw the girl‚Äôs fingers tremble. But her voice was steady enough when she spoke.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIs that mere conjecture on their part, or is it based on any fact?‚Äù she asked.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm not in full knowledge of all their secrets,‚Äù answered Bryce, ‚Äúbut I‚Äôve heard enough to know that there‚Äôs a basis of undeniable fact on which they‚Äôre going. I know for instance, beyond doubt, that Braden and Ransford were bosom friends, years ago, that Braden was married to a girl whom Ransford had wanted to marry, that Braden‚Äôs wife suddenly left him, mysteriously, a few years later, and that, at the same time, Ransford made an equally mysterious disappearance. The police know all that. What is the inference to be drawn? What inference would anyone‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou yourself, for example‚ÅÝ‚Äîdraw?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúNone, till I‚Äôve heard what <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford had to say,‚Äù replied Mary.</p>
			<p>Bryce disliked that ready retort. He was beginning to feel that he was being met by some force stronger than his own.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat‚Äôs all very well,‚Äù he remarked. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt say that I wouldn‚Äôt do the same. But I‚Äôm only explaining the police position, and showing you the danger likely to arise from it. The police theory is this, as far as I can make it out: Ransford, years ago, did Braden a wrong, and Braden certainly swore revenge when he could find him. Circumstances prevented Braden from seeking him closely for some time; at last they met here, by accident. Here the police aren‚Äôt decided. One theory is that there was an altercation, blows, a struggle, in the course of which Braden met his death; the other is that Ransford deliberately took Braden up into the gallery and flung him through that open doorway‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThat,‚Äù observed Mary, with something very like a sneer, ‚Äúseems so likely that I should think it would never occur to anybody but the sort of people you‚Äôre telling me of! No man of any real sense would believe it for a minute!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúSome people of plain common sense do believe it for all that!‚Äù retorted Bryce. ‚ÄúFor it‚Äôs quite possible. But as I say, I‚Äôm only repeating. And of course, the rest of it follows on that. The police theory is that Collishaw witnessed Braden‚Äôs death at Ransford‚Äôs hands, that Ransford got to know that Collishaw knew of that, and that he therefore quietly removed Collishaw. And it is on all that that they‚Äôre going, and will go. Don‚Äôt ask me if I think they‚Äôre right or wrong! I‚Äôm only telling you what I know so as to show you what danger Ransford is in.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mary made no immediate answer, and Bryce sat watching her. Somehow‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe was at a loss to explain it to himself‚ÅÝ‚Äîthings were not going as he had expected. He had confidently believed that the girl would be frightened, scared, upset, ready to do anything that he asked or suggested. But she was plainly not frightened. And the fingers which busied themselves with the fancywork had become steady again, and her voice had been steady all along.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúPray,‚Äù she asked suddenly, and with a little satirical inflection of voice which Brice was quick to notice, ‚Äúpray, how is it that you‚ÅÝ‚Äînot a policeman, not a detective!‚ÅÝ‚Äîcome to know so much of all this? Since when were you taken into the confidence of Mitchington and the mysterious person from London?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou know as well as I do that I have been dragged into the case against my wishes,‚Äù answered Bryce almost sullenly. ‚ÄúI was fetched to Braden‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI saw him die. It was I who found Collishaw‚ÅÝ‚Äîdead. Of course, I‚Äôve been mixed up, whether I would or not, and I‚Äôve had to see a good deal of the police, and naturally I‚Äôve learnt things.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mary suddenly turned on him with a flash of the eye which might have warned Bryce that he had signally failed in the main feature of his adventure.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd what have you learnt that makes you come here and tell me all this?‚Äù she exclaimed. ‚ÄúDo you think I‚Äôm a simpleton, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝBryce? You set out by saying that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford is in danger from the police, and that you know more‚ÅÝ‚Äîmuch more than the police! what does that mean? Shall I tell you? It means that you‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou!‚ÅÝ‚Äîknow that the police are wrong, and that if you like you can prove to them that they are wrong! Now, then isn‚Äôt that so?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI am in possession of certain facts,‚Äù began Bryce. ‚ÄúI‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mary stopped him with a look.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy turn!‚Äù she said. ‚ÄúYou‚Äôre in possession of certain facts. Now isn‚Äôt it the truth that the facts you are in possession of are proof enough to you that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford is as innocent as I am? It‚Äôs no use your trying to deceive me! Isn‚Äôt that so?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI could certainly turn the police off his track,‚Äù admitted Bryce, who was growing highly uncomfortable. ‚ÄúI could divert‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
			<p>Mary gave him another look and dropping her needlework continued to watch him steadily.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúDo you call yourself a gentleman?‚Äù she asked quietly. ‚ÄúOr we‚Äôll leave the term out. Do you call yourself even decently honest? For, if you do, how can you have the sheer impudence‚ÅÝ‚Äîmore, insolence!‚ÅÝ‚Äîto come here and tell me all this when you know that the police are wrong and that you could‚ÅÝ‚Äîto use your own term, which is your way of putting it‚ÅÝ‚Äîturn them off the wrong track? Whatever sort of man are you? Do you want to know my opinion of you in plain words?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúYou seem very anxious to give it, anyway,‚Äù retorted Bryce.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI will give it, and it will perhaps put an end to this,‚Äù answered Mary. ‚ÄúIf you are in possession of anything in the way of evidence which would prove <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford‚Äôs innocence and you are wilfully suppressing it, you are bad, wicked, base, cruel, unfit for any decent being‚Äôs society! And,‚Äù she added, as she picked up her work and rose, ‚Äúyou‚Äôre not going to have any more of mine!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúA moment!‚Äù said Bryce. He was conscious that he had somehow played all his cards badly, and he wanted another opening. ‚ÄúYou‚Äôre misunderstanding me altogether! I never said‚ÅÝ‚Äînever inferred‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat I wouldn‚Äôt save Ransford.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThen, if there‚Äôs need, which I don‚Äôt admit, you acknowledge that you could save him?‚Äù she exclaimed sharply. ‚ÄúJust as I thought. Then, if you‚Äôre an honest man, a man with any pretensions to honour, why don‚Äôt you at once! Any man who had such feelings as those I‚Äôve just mentioned wouldn‚Äôt hesitate one second. But you‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou!‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou come and‚ÅÝ‚Äîtalk about it! As if it were a game! <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝBryce, you make me feel sick, mentally, morally sick.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bryce had risen to his feet when Mary rose, and he now stood staring at her. Ever since his boyhood he had laughed and sneered at the mere idea of the finer feelings‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe believed that every man has his price‚ÅÝ‚Äîand that honesty and honour are things useful as terms but of no real existence. And now he was wondering‚ÅÝ‚Äîreally wondering‚ÅÝ‚Äîif this girl meant the things she said: if she really felt a mental loathing of such minds and purposes as he knew his own were, or if it were merely acting on her part. Before he could speak she turned on him again more fiercely than before.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúShall I tell you something else in plain language?‚Äù she asked. ‚ÄúYou evidently possess a very small and limited knowledge‚ÅÝ‚Äîif you have any at all!‚ÅÝ‚Äîof women, and you apparently don‚Äôt rate their mental qualities at any high standard. Let me tell you that I am not quite such a fool as you seem to think me! You came here this afternoon to bargain with me! You happen to know how much I respect my guardian and what I owe him for the care he has taken of me and my brother. You thought to trade on that! You thought you could make a bargain with me; you were to save <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford, and for reward you were to have me! You daren‚Äôt deny it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝBryce‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI can see through you!‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI never said it, at any rate,‚Äù answered Bryce.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúOnce more, I say, I‚Äôm not a fool!‚Äù exclaimed Mary. ‚ÄúI saw through you all along. And you‚Äôve failed! I‚Äôm not in the least frightened by what you‚Äôve said. If the police arrest <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRansford knows how to defend himself. And you‚Äôre not afraid for him! You know you aren‚Äôt. It wouldn‚Äôt matter twopence to you if he were hanged tomorrow, for you hate him. But look to yourself! Men who cheat, and scheme, and plot, and plan as you do come to bad ends. Mind yours! Mind the wheel doesn‚Äôt come full circle. And now, if you please, go away and don‚Äôt dare to come near me again!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Bryce made no answer. He had listened, with an attempt at a smile, to all this fiery indignation, but as Mary spoke the last words he was suddenly aware of something that drew his attention from her and them. Through an opening in Ransford‚Äôs garden hedge he could see the garden door of the Folliots‚Äô house across the Close. And at that moment out of it emerged Folliot himself in conversation with Glassdale!</p>
			<p>Without a word, Bryce snatched up his hat from the table of the summerhouse, and went swiftly away‚ÅÝ‚Äîa new scheme, a new idea in his mind.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
